Mathematicians don't tend to favor discussing philosophy, so I can't be sure how popular this view is, but I was once told that "we could have build a different mathematics than we did."  Suppose this is true.  How could we know whether the particular mathematics we have is the one we want?  Suppose we decided to tear it all down and build a different one, how could we be sure that it was actually different?  It would certainly take a long time to do so, and it would be a shame to realize that--upon completing our new home--all we had done was rename some things.  If that happened, could we conclude that the mathematics we know is the only one for us?  Or would we have to acknowledge that maybe we simply rebuilt it out of a habit that we failed to shake?

In this paper I propose a theory that I expect might be useful for answering these questions. The theory is called TMMC (a Topological Metatheory for Mathematical Criticism).  As an example of how TMMC might be used, consider a theory (like real analysis) and a model for that theory (like the real numbers).  Properly applied, TMMC will allow us to define metrics for how well the theory fits the model, and study properties of the theory-model-pair.  Whether mathematics needs such a tool is left as an open question for now.  As it is developed, I will occasionally point out scenarios where it might be worth having.

In order for TMMC to be applicable to a theory-model-pair, that pair must itself be a model for TMMC.  In order to achieve this, we must be able to conceive of each component of the pair as topological space  (i.e. one for the theory and one for the model).  We can show this generally by considering a large topological space containing some (or all) theories, as well as a large space containg models for those theories.  If we can show that these large spaces are indeed topologial, the applicability of TMMC to a particular theory-model-pair will come "for free" because we can take the subspace topology generated by the particular theory and pair it whith the subspace topology generated by the particular model.

We shall start with Theory Space (Th).  Let T be a set of propositions and let h be a topology on T where each open set (P) has this property: elements of P are either themselves axioms, or can be proven from other axioms in P.  So any h-open set either consists of all axioms, or it contains, through the application of logic rules to axioms, some nugget of reasoning.  As it stands, Th is the discrete topology, since you could show that any set of propositions is open by just taking every proposition to be an axiom.  We shall soon add a restriction about when a proposition can be taken as an axiom that will make Th topologically more interesting, but first we need to answer this:  When are two propositions equal?

Once a theorem is proved in mathematics, we generally do not refer to it by its proof, but only by some string of symbols that we understand *could* be proved.  This allows us to simplify things by taking that string of symbols as an axiom, and only bothering to expand it into a proof if pressed to do so by a skeptic.  This potential for expansion represents an oportunity to transform a small Th-open set with a couple dubious axioms into a larger Th-open set with different axioms that are (hopefully) more agreeable to the audience.  We shall call this process *proof-substitution*(10). It is a facet of argumentation that we wish to preserve, and in order to do so we cannot have any ambiguity about *which* proof a given string of symbols ought to be expanded to.  Because of this, we shall take two propositions to be equal when they have the same proof.

It may seem that we have swept something under the rug here, because now we need to know what a proof is.  But notice that our open sets here provide a very specific context in which to find a proof for a theorem.  They provide a neighboring set of propositions and a guarantee (i.e. provability) that the chosen proposition can be traced back to axioms.  That is to say, our open sets are themselves proofs, so the proof to consider when determining proposition equality is (at least for starters) the one that is indicated in the open set that contains the point.  A diagram may be helpful here.

[ Proposition Graph goes here]

Let A = { 8, 9, 10 }
Let B = { 1, 8, 9, 10, 11 }

First note that if you take 8 and 9 as axioms then 10 is provable, and if you take 1, 8, and 9 as axioms then both 10 and 11 are provable, so A and B are Th-open sets.  So far, we have described proposition equality in terms of the neighborhoods of those propositions.  The reader may be at this point concerned about circularity: If a point's identity is defined based on what set it is in, can you still define a set based on what points are in it?  Well, on the surface, probably not, but this is where the process of proof-substitution discussed previously comes in.  As an example, let us prove that proposition 10 is indeed equal to itself.

Since 10 is in A, we take 8 and 9 as axioms.  Then we expand A by substituting proofs of 8 and 9.  8 and 9 are no longer required to be axioms, and our new set is {6,7,4,8,9,10}, with {6,7,4} as axioms.  Expanding further upon 6 and 7 adds 2,3,4 to our set, and they are they are now the only axioms necessary to keep the set open.  Repeating this process for 10 in set B results in the same set, except that it has 1 and 11 in it as well.  We can exclude them, since they are not necessary to prove 10.  In either case, we end up with the set {2,3,4,6,7,8,9,10} where {2,3,4} are axioms.  To be totally rigorous we would also need to show that the proof structure underlying this set is also equivalent for A and B, but we will defer this until TMMC is completed.  For now we will just take as an axiom that a proposition is some thing for which a unique proof can be found, and further that two proofs are equal if they rely on the same axioms in the same way (i.e. they apply the same logic rules in the same order).

Conventionally, the word "axiom" is used to indicate the starting points of big open sets in Th, like whole branches of mathematics.  When one is examining a smaller thing, like a proof, "hypothesis" is typically used.  Topology being a dicipline that does not care about size, we will use "axiom" for both of these.  The conventional distinction still has meaning here, however.  If you look at theory space as a directed graph (where the nodes are propositions and the edges can be bundled such that each bundle represents the application of a logic rule) the hypothesis-axioms are nodes with both incoming and outgoing edges.  Conventional axioms, then, have only outgoing edges.  If an open set has only conventional axioms, then it is a basis set for theory space.

To see this, note that we have defined points in theory space in such a way that the space must contain axioms that prove the proposition.  So we can find basis sets that cover any point in Th. Also, given any two basis sets with a nonempty intersection, we can find another basis set that contains that intersection.  To do so, simply take the intersection of the axioms for the original bases, and consider the interior of that set.  For example, consider the diagram above.  If B1 = {2,3,4,6,7,8} and B2 = {1,2,3,5,6}.  The only non-basis-axiom in the intersection is proposition 6.  We can take the intersection of the axioms for B1 and B2 ({2,3}) and find its interior ({2,3,6}) and notice that it contains 6, and that it is itself a basis set.

Just for fun, I like to call a collection of basis sets for theory space (together with the models they describe) a "platonic realm".  In order to align to the conventions of mathematics, specifically the desire for elegance, it may be worth noting that in practice a platonic realm will contain relatively few sets, and each of those sets will contain as few axioms as possible.  TMMC allows for really inelegant platonic realms, like the one where every proposition in T is taken to be an axiom.  Hopefully, mathematicians do not need TMMC to understand that this would be a pretty useless platonic realm--if we were to adopt it, all true statements would simply be true by convention.  However, it may be desirable to strike an appropriate balance between elegance and some other property, and for that TMMC might be of some use.

In addition to the basis sets we have been describing, we must add to Theory Space an additional basis set--the character set (C).  There is a component to a typical proof that breaks the notion of "proposition" so severely that it makes sense to have a special set for them.  These are the statements of a proof that introduce the characters, like this:  "Let S be a set."  Such a point is necessary for most proofs--i.e. for most (non-basis) open sets--but it doesn't really belong in our platonic realm since it gets thrown away once the desired theorem is acheieved.  The character set is infinite, countable, and doesn't contribute to our notion of elegance.

It is common in mathematics to encounter a proof that starts something like, "Let X and Y be nonempty sets and let f be a function from X to Y such that..."  Since the inclusion of characters in the proof is represented in TMMC as additional axioms, it represents the creation of a new, non-basis, open set. Further, once the desired property has been achieved, it is implicitly accepted between mathematicians that those characters are now out of scope.  A well known proof of the infinitude of primes includes a finite list of primes (p_1, p_2, ..., p_n) as characters.  Despite the popularity of this proof, it is not generally acceptable to reach into that open set and say something like "It is well known that p_2 is prime".  I like to call sets of this nature "playgrounds" because they are where all the fun happens, and because the lessons learned there can persist, even after the characters have left.

A question that I have occasionally heared posed--though usually not by mathematicians--is, "If mathematical objects 'exist', then *where* do they exist?"  If the asker were familliar with TMMC, this one could be answered "in a playground".  This sort of interaction is generally of no use to the mathematician, but an analogous situation is the taking stock of a half-finished proof and asking oneself "what do I have that I can use from here".  To answer this using TMMC, one takes the point indicated by "here" (probably the most recent statement written) and performs proof-substitution repeatedly, noting the cases where items were included from the character set.  Once no further proof-substitution can be done (i.e. the set is a basis set) one has a list of all mathematical objects that exist with respect to the starting point.

Before moving on to discuss Model Space, I would like to stop and consider a few topological concepts, and how their appearence in Theory Space translates to the everyday language of mathematics.  Open sets, as we have been discussing, are nuggets of reasoning.  Often, the structure of a proof culminates in a particular property that we set out to prove.  This is when we get to say "QED" and point out the establishment of a particular proposition.  In the diagram above, 11 is probably the QED proposition.  Suppose you set out to prove some property, but ended up proving a number of properties that feel somewhat close to what you set out to do.  This may not do the trick for your particular purposes, but according to TMMC you have still mapped out a number of open sets in theory space.  In this instance, there might be another mathematician out there who *is* trying to establish one of your accidental results.  Perhaps, rather than going into the wastebasket, your failed proof attempt could go into a database.  If there were a format that would preserve the semantic structure of your argument, and a query language that could find it again, future mathematicians could either repurpose your failure into their success, or at least be aware that other people have traveled this particular path through theory space.  Maybe it would be fun to contact them for collaboration.

The reader may have noticed that Theorem Space has the discrete toplology, which comes from the fact that it is permissable to take any proposition one wants as an axiom.  This was an oversight that will be corrected in a later draft of this paper.  For theorem space to be useful as a medium of communication between mathematicians, it must be constructed so that open sets indicate a set of axioms that are accepted by both mathematicians.  The above paragraphs will be edited for consistency, but for now make the following adjustment:

The space formerly knowh as Theorem Space will be adjusted to be called Permissive Theorem Space, where anything goes.  In order to make a space that is useful in the above way, one must fix a basis for Permissive Theorem Space.  Then, the open sets in our new space: Platonic Theory Space are those whose propositions can be proven from axioms in the chosen basis.  Note that the extreme bases are not very useful.  A basis formed by taking a proposition and its negation as axioms indeed covers the space, but provides proofs that reduce to "assume a contradiction".  A basis formed by taking each proposition as an axiom is equally useless, since all open sets under a Theory space rooted in that sort of platonic realm represent a proof by "because I said so". 

A good way to constuct an example platonic theory space might be to let one basis set be the one whose axioms generate analysis, and another for number theory, and another for geometry, and feel free to throw in any other theories that you like too.  If you're writing for a particular audience, it may instead be helpful to use a space those basis sets are known to be familliar to them, this way TMMC will exclude arguments that rely on theories that the audience is known to be unfamilliar with.  Alternatively, a reader attempting to understand a particular mathematical fact might use TMMC to filter out arguments whose proofs rely on axioms that are not in that reader's platonic realm.

Platonic Theorem Space was constructed such that the open sets are proofs whose dependencies lie in some set of pre-established theories (i.e. the mathematical canon).  A problem can be posed in this space by specifying a cast of characters and then requesting a neighborhood of the subspace topology generated by that cast.

Other topological concepts have meaning here too.  The closure of a set in platonic theorem space indicates a region that can be removed from the theory without the rest of the space collapsing (i.e. some facts are provable without the removed axioms and consequences).  If a previously established theorem is "in the way" of where the mathematician wants to go, a rather heavy-handed way to proceed might be to query TMMC for the closure of that theorem, and then exclude those axioms from the platonic realm that our theory is rooted in.  After that, the way would be clear for new growth  (although who knows what other useful results may have been lost in the deletion).  Recalling the questions posed at the beginning, here is a way for us to explore what it might mean to have a "different mathematics"

Other metamathematical results ought to be able to be framed by TMMC, and we find that this is the case.  For example, the fact that Cantor's continuum hypothesis is independent of ZF or ZFC can be restated in TMMC by saying that the continuum hypothesis is not in the interior of ZF or ZFC.

Another component of TMMC is model space, which is a set of true or false statements about models.  A basis set in model space contains all true statements about the same model.  We can then frame the process of applying mathematics as that of finding continuous functions from platonic theory space into model space.  With minimal restriction, we ought to be able to align the notion of continuity with Tarski's definition for mathematical truth.

From here, it should be possibile to restate Godel's incompleteness theorem in TMMC by saying that no bundle of "explanation" functions that covers the set of models for number theory can also be such that each function is continuous. 

If it turns out that TMMC can be completed such that it has these properties and can encapsulate significant metamathematical notions in the language of topology, it is hoped that one might attempt to create visualizations of theory space which could aide both pedagogically and as a comminucation tool for working mathematicians.
